---
title: "Inverted Discourse"
date: 2017-06-08
tags:
- social media
summary: |
  I wrote about an event I observed on Twitter and how it pertains to popularity
  effects I’ve seen in real life and especially amplified on social media.
---

On Twitter, I follow several accounts which are rather inter-connected in their
topics and interactions, such as [@SwiftOnSecurity][1], [@AwfulyPrideful][2],
and [@MalwareTechBlog][3]. From here on out, I will be referring to these users
as, respectively, Tay with “they” pronouns, Amanda with “she”, and MalwareTech
with “he”. (If you are one of these people and I made the wrong choice, please
let me know and I’ll correct.)

Tay is an *enormously* popular account, and I will admit I absolutely followed
them first by a significant lead. Through their feed, I was introduced to Amanda
and MalwareTech, and as I enjoyed what they had to offer, I followed them as
well.

Amanda has already written some [excellent backstory and commentary][4] on the
events prompting this particular post, so I’m not going to rehash the baseline.
Go read her piece and get back to me; I’m just providing third-party thoughts
tangential to the main event.

----

If you’ve ever said something to little recognition only to have a more popular
person say that same thing and get more recognition, you can sympathize with
Amanda’s professed “pettiness” and “saltiness” (actual quotes not scare quotes).

Amanda’s not upset with MalwareTech about either instance, since as far as
anyone knows MalwareTech didn’t plagiarize her work but rather seems to be an
instance of great minds thinking alike. There’s been a little bit of
misunderstanding about that and I don’t want to add to it myself, so, kindly
presume that everyone in the story is on friendly terms.

Anyway, on to the actual point I have to make with this piece.

----

Social media in general has some serious flaws with the way social interactions
and conversations are modeled. Each network is broken in a different way, but as
this piece is prompted by events occurring on and somewhat particular to Twitter
I shall focus only on it.

# Ordering

In pretty much every medium, the first person to make a comment is considered
more important than anyone else who makes that comment, and the relative
importance of any particular person making a point decreases as time from the
original remark occurs. But Twitter’s timeline, like that of other live feeds
across the internet, is Newest First. All else being equal, if Amanda and
MalwareTech post before I start scrolling, I will see the second post first and
the first, second.

> This is probably not what Jesus meant by “the first shall be last and the last
> shall be first.”
{.bq-safe .iso7010 :role="complementary"}

As a reader, I will come across MalwareTech’s tweet first, and have a genuine
reaction, possibly including liking/retweeting, to it first. By the time I see
Amanda’s, I will have already reacted, and will probably not be moved by hers.
If the two posted independently, this is merely irritating; if MalwareTech had
seen Amanda’s and decided to repost it himself (***which is not the case; I***
***just only have the one example scenario***) then it is downright unfair and
rude.

# Popularity

MalwareTech has the bigger audience by almost two orders of magnitude; it stands
to reason that his tweets would reach a larger audience. This is fine, on its
own. Twitter, however, quickly finds ways to make it less fine.

I am an audience member for both MalwareTech and Amanda, so from my perspective
it doesn’t matter which of them is more popular; I regard both with equal fervor
as I follow both directly. Twitter, however, shuffles my feed so that more
popular posts appear before less popular, and this is judged both by impressions
on each post, but also by the audience count of the poster. MalwareTech is
approaching 100k followers, Amanda just cleared 600; clearly MalwareTech has
“better” content according to Twitter and his cuts in line. This is terrific
behavior… when your platform is trying to min-max people’s time and not bother
to require that they invest attention without a clear indication of reward. Good
for ad revenue, bad for actual conversation. If it’s not apparent what is and
isn’t Twitter’s service and product yet, hopefully the picture is growing
clearer.

This setting can be disabled, but it’s apparently on by default. I certainly
hadn’t turned it on manually, as I dislike this behavior, but it was on for me
when I was told the switch existed.

# Method

If you’re in a conversation, which do you value more? Someone in the group
responding to you, or someone grabbing a bullhorn and speaking *at*, not *to*,
the crowd?

Most people would value the former, and consider the latter less cool. Twitter
has the opposite priorities: replies are limited to those mentioned in the
thread already, and the followers of the speaker.

Amanda made her joke in reply to Tay; I might or might not have seen it on my
own merit, though if Tay with their massive popularity had reacted to it, that
would have helped. Replies to Tay do a lot better when Tay likes, responds, or
retweets them, than when they do not visibly engage.

MalwareTech retweeted an article directly with his commentary; Amanda provided
it as a reply to Tay’s tweet about it. As MalwareTech’s was a top-level post, it
got primacy of audience; as Amanda’s was a child item, it did not.

Granted, it is basically impossible for Twitter’s algorithms to note this, and I
don’t think anybody is demanding a change. But that is still a noteworthy effect
of the platform.

# Conclusion

I don’t have one, really. I was a bystander to the example provided, and only
even got pulled in because I happened to be in a position to observe, and noted
that to Amanda.

I do think that the effects social media are having on the general paradigm of
social interaction are interesting and worth talking about. I’m not going to
condemn the internet in general or social media in particular as some evil of
technology without which the human condition was better – I greatly appreciate
that these technologies let me stay in touch with my friends halfway across the
country, and get information I enjoy from an InfoSec person who uses the guise
of a pop star to flavor their message, and also write this article in the event
that you or anyone reads it. But there is a spectrum between Universal Good and
Universal Evil, and social media is not without its flaws. The upheaval of
social norms to which humans are long accustomed is, at the very least chaotic
and disturbing, even if the end result may be better in the long run, and the
admixture of conversation and capital certainly leads to some extremely twisted
events in the pursuit of wealth, be it monetary or influential.

Just something to think about as we try to adjust the momentum of collective
consciousness to new technologies, I guess.

[1]: https://twitter.com/SwiftOnSecurity
[2]: https://twitter.com/AwfulyPrideful
[3]: https://twitter.com/MalwareTechBlog
[4]: https://notawfulsecurity.blogspot.ca/2017/05/on-gaming-social-media.html
