---
title: Stop Buying Trucks
summary: >
  An examination of America’s recreational trucking habit, by Klaus Payne
---

There is a plethora of options in the American marketplace fighting for your
attention when you start shopping for trucks. The Ford F series, under its
flagship F-150 light duty trucks, has been the best selling truck in the US
since 1977. Dodge has been rolling out quality trucks since the Power Wagon in
1945; the Chevrolet Silverado has a stack of medals that makes Michael Phelps
envious. Even Lincoln has rolled out the Mark LT, a luxury pickup, in 2005. This
is without looking at the Tundras, Tacomas, Hiluxes, Rangers, Colorado, the
Sierra, the Titan, or the Canyon. This is by no means an exhaustive list either
– just the beginning of the options. The best option, though, won’t be found in
a television commercial, or on a page in Car and Driver. The best option in the
pickup market sits silently, in the background, the empty space on the lot after
the rows of vehicles have run out. The best option in the pickup marketplace is
not to buy a truck.

This is not an anti-truck rant. I’m not writing from a high-mileage agenda
slandering gas guzzling behemoths. I love trucks, and have since I was a child
driving our Ranger across the family farm. I still drive a 2013 Tundra, and love
it. It is that love of the utility pickup that makes me say we need to stop
buying trucks.

First, we need to accept that we are buying more trucks now than we ever have
before. Truck ownership is commonplace and accepted. The rise in the popularity
of the pickup is in the public record, and supported by infallible government
record keeping. The graph below shows the number of trucks registered in the
United States from 1925 - the year the first popular mass produced pickup, the
Model T Runabout, was released - to 1995 - the last year with easily available
data.

![Trucks registered in the United States][0]{:.right .halfcol}

This graph shows a marked rise in pickup ownership over this time period. With
the exception of the 1940-1945 war period, the number of trucks on the road has
grown continuously. Of course, this cannot tell the full story. This 70 year
period also saw immense population growth, the rise of mass production and
consumerism, and the growth of the American auto industry into a world economic
power. Of course the number of pickups registered in the United States would
increase over that time period.

Unfortunately, none of these factors account for the increase in pickups on the
road. Shown below are the number of trucks per capita and the proportion of
pickups and cars registered on American roads in the same time span.

![Trucks registered per capita in the United States][1]{:.right .halfcol}

![Proportion of cars and trucks in the United States][2]{:.right .halfcol}

We can see the rampant growth of pickup ownership and registration in the US.
Over 70 years, 70 million more trucks appeared on the roads. This is a growth
from 12% to 35% of the cars registered in the US. Trucks per capita grew from 1
in 50 people owning trucks in 1925 to more than 1 in 4 in 1995. Experian
research from 2018 shows that this trend has only continued. Full sized pickups
represent the largest portion of automobiles in 48 of 50 states (of the two
states not dominated by full size pickups, one is dominated by midrange standard
cars and the other by small pickup trucks.) The pickup is the plurality on the
American roadways. The unstoppable growth in truck popularity can not be argued.

To understand why the pickup has blossomed in America, we need to agree on the
role of the pickup. The pickup is a utility vehicle first and foremost. Pickups
are built with tougher suspension for heavy loads, higher clearance for off-road
and rough terrain use, tow packages, higher torque and lower speeds, four wheel
drive, plus the quintessential pickup attribute - the bed. These are answers to
work demands. There is a reason the pickup is a staple of the blue collar
lifestyle. With this in mind, we see that that pickup is first and foremost a
tool. However, its rise in popularity is not a response to an increased need for
this tool.

The American economy has dramatically reshaped itself since 1925 and the release
of the Model-T Runabout. In the late 40s and 50s, the US was a manufacturing
titan. Times have changed - the Green Revolution has reduced the number of
farmers; manufacturing has largely moved overseas, construction has decreased,
and mining is in its death throes. The US became what is considered a tertiary
economy. Basically, this means that the economy is dominated by services (the
tertiary sector) rather than material extraction or material
processing/manufacturing (the primary and secondary sectors.) This is a good
thing; a tertiary dominated economy is the hallmark of a highly developed nation
with a high national income. However, the pickup is definitely a tool of the
primary and secondary sectors. It is a tool designed for farming, logging,
construction, mining, and similar fields. As these fields shrink in the American
economy, the need for pickups on the American roadways should shrink as well.
Instead, their presence has only grown.

The trend to be addressed is, if less trucks are needed, more trucks must be
wanted. We, as a country, need to stop buying trucks because we want to. I’d
never tell someone not to buy a truck if it’s needed, but the data shows that
the US is buying far more trucks than are justified. We are clogging our
national arteries with oversized vehicles that are never used to their
potential.

This casual truck use is not limited to truck sales – it also affects truck
design. As more and more trucks are purchased for non-utility purposes, consumer
demand has led to new trends in truck design. The Dodge Power Wagon in 1945
featured an 8 foot bed as standard. The reasons are obvious. It’s a bed that
fits building materials and the standard 4x8 sheet. It is long enough for the
bucket on a front end loader to empty into. Above all else, it is a purpose
built bed whose dimensions are driven by its use. Later, the long-bed and
short-bed designations appeared. Now, as pickup cabs have developed more and
more options (standard cab, extended cab, Super Cab, Access Cab, King Cab,
double cab, quad cab, crew cab, super crew, crew max, mega cab, and I can only
assume hyper cab and ludicrous cab are coming in the 2020 model year), the bed
lengths vary to fit them. The 8 foot bed can still be found, but bed lengths now
range from 8 to 5.5 feet. In fact, compact trucks are available with beds as
short as 5 feet. The Subaru Baja (a unibody pickup, unique in its own right)
boasts a bed of 41 inches - only three and a half feet.

These new trucks, defined by larger and larger cabs and smaller and smaller
beds, clearly answer a new consumer demand. The expanding cabs and shrinking
beds show a shifting priority in the truck’s cargo. The new modern truck fits a
family, not a sheet of plywood. Other baubles have also been added to the truck.
Vehicles formerly groomed for horsepower and rugged design now boast heated
seats, cooled seats, heated steering wheels, and deluxe stereos. The trucks on
America’s roads no longer answer a utility; they instead, answer convenience at
best and appearance at worst.

The pickup is an American icon. There is no doubting the cultural appeal to a
well worn truck parked next to your home. However, sentimentality and a
pervasive advertising message is not enough reason to drive one. For all my love
of the pickup, I acknowledge their shortcomings. Seventy dollars to fill up the
tank. Anywhere from ten to twenty miles per gallon. They barely squeeze into
parking spaces and garages. The initial cost of trucks is skyrocketing as well;
you’d be lucky to escape for less than forty thousand and can easily pick out a
truck worth seventy thousand or more.

So, I ask anyone shopping for a truck to stop and ask themselves these questions
before purchasing a truck. Do you need a truck, or do you want a truck? Are you
shopping for a tool, or an accessory? I think many of you will find hesitation
or easy “no”s when answering these questions. If you found yourself pausing, or
wondered which category you fell into as you read this article, consider the
unadvertised option. Save the cash, the roads, the traffic, and the pickup’s
pedigree as a utility vehicle. Stop buying trucks.

[0]: ./2018-11-06-stop-buying-trucks/absolute.jpg
[1]: ./2018-11-06-stop-buying-trucks/per-capita.jpg
[2]: ./2018-11-06-stop-buying-trucks/proportional.jpg
