---
title: Rust Flow
date: 2018-11-10
tags:
- rust
summary: >
  Rust allows for a very functional style of value “flow” without sacrificing
  the performance of a more traditionally imperative sequence. Furthermore, the
  functional flow may offer more clarity about value lifetimes and error
  handling that the imperative sequence might obscure.
---

## Introduction

Programming is, essentially, the construction of sequences of actions that
inspect and modify data. A program can often be viewed as a set of routes that
data follows, changing and being changed by the program as it moves from the
start to the finish.

Various paradigms of programming have different ways of expressing the sequence
of inspection and transformation. The language in which we work gives us the
tools to express our thoughts, and in turn shapes the way we think. All
languages have to be able to express the same basic logical processes, but the
way in which they do so favors or penalizes different ways of thinking about and
modeling the data and control structure of the program.

## Function Sequences

> This section is a review of function and method syntax. This can be skimmed or
> skipped as you like. I’m just allergic to writing articles without first
> inventing the universe.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m004 role="complementary"}

The classical syntax for applying functions to data names the function first,
then the data that enters it. This means that function sequences wind up written
out of order, like this C example:

```c
third(second(first(f_one, f_two), m_two), l_two);
```

When you read this, you process `third`, then `second`, then `first`, but the
computer processes them in the order that they are named. Like Richard Hendricks
in the HBO show *Silicon Valley*, function application evaluates middle-out.

This is hard to read. You have to read the middle terms, then expand to both the
left and the right, in order to trace the whole expression. And if I had written
that to use additional function evaluations for `m_two` and `l_two`, it would be
even more confusing. Just for fun, here’s the full order of evaluation in a C
expression[^1]:

```c
fifth(third(first(), second()), fourth());
```

> C uses this middle-out, oscillating, order for its type declarations too. It’s
> notoriously hard to read, to the point where “tell me what this type is” is a
> fun game C nerds use to mess with each other. [CDecl.org][cdecl] exists to
> help with this.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m002 role="complementary"}

### Method Syntax

Many languages offer something called method syntax, where functions can be
defined so that they are invoked with a special first argument preceding the
function name, and any additional arguments after the method name, like this
example in Elixir:

```elixir
first |> func(second, third) |> func_two(fourth, fifth)
```

I chose Elixir for this sample because Elixir has a very loose concept of method
scope, and any value can be piped (the `|>` is called pipe) into any function
whose first argument is the correct type.

The above code is equivalent to this C-style form:

```elixir
func_two(func(first, second, third), fourth, fifth)
```

Languages with a strong concept of datatypes and methods (all object-oriented
languages, Rust, and thus ends my familiarity) often define methods as special
functions attached to a datatype, and call them with the same operator used for
data field access. For example, in C++:

```cpp
class Example {
  public:
    void func(void) { /* … */ }
};
Example ex;
ex.func();
```

This defines a datatype called `Example`, which has a method called `func`
attached to it that returns nothing and *ostensibly* takes nothing. In reality,
C++ and the languages that follow its lead (Java, JavaScript, C♯, even Ruby)
treat the “receiver” as magic, and don’t require that it be explicitly listed in
the function signature. These also typically don’t even allow using C-style
function syntax to call the method as `func(receiver, arguments…)`![^2] In C++,
the receiver is implicitly available inside the body of all methods, and can be
explicitly accessed via the keyword `this`, which magically populates as a
pointer to the receiver.

> Note that I will use the term *receiver* throughout this article to refer to
> the value on which a method is called. This is just a term for “the value left
> of the dot” and also “the value behind the magic `this` or `self` keyword”.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m002 role="complementary"}

When methods return values, instead of `void`, those values can themselves
receive additional methods. This leads to something called a “method chain”,
where an initial value receives a method and returns a value, which receives a
method and returns a value, and so on until the chain stops. A classic example
in JavaScript is selecting a DOM node and then manipulating it:

```js
$("#america")
  .css({ "border": "none" })
  .click();
```

Line 1 finds a DOM node; line 2 receives it, manipulates it, and returns it; and
line 3 receives it and manipulates it (and returns it, but the snippet doesn’t
collect the return value). The DOM node is the receiver of both `.css` and
`.click()`.

### Rust

Rust sits midway between the object-oriented C++ family, and the data-oriented
Elixir. It allows the programmer to define functions on a type and be called
like methods, but it does not allow arbitrarily passing any value into any
function whose first parameter matches the type (D, another object-oriented
language, **does** allow this, and I’m very jealous).

In Rust, a method is defined using `impl` blocks:

```rust
struct Example;

impl Example {
  fn new() -> Self;
  fn chain(self) -> Self;
  fn borrow(&self);
  fn take(self);
}
```

The first function (“inherent method”) I defined here would be considered a
“static method” in object-oriented languages, and require a special keyword or
decorator in order to not receive an instance. Rust, by contrast, explicitly
lists out every function parameter and the special `self` keyword indicates a
receiver.

Thus, `Example::new()` produces an `Example`, but does not receive one. It has
to be called as a function, by name, and cannot be called as `value.new()`.

The `chain` and `take` methods both receive `self`, which means they take an
`Example` instance directly. When an `Example` instance exists in the code, Rust
can call it using C-style function syntax:

```rust
let e = Example::new();
let f = Example::chain(e);
```

or C++-style method syntax:

```rust
f.take();
```

Rust also distinguishes between functions that take a value, and functions that
take a reference[^3], with the `&` (or `&mut`) prefix sigil. The function-style
syntax requires explicitly writing out the borrow, while the method-style syntax
makes this implicit.

```rust
let e = Example::new();
Example::borrow(&e);
e.borrow(); // equivalent to (&e).borrow()
```

## Method Flow

Rust strongly favors (especially in `Iterator` use) long chains of methods that
act on data. These can be thought of as assembly lines – data comes on to the
line at the start, proceeds through each method in the chain, being used and
changed, and then emerges as a more finished product. An `Iterator` example
might be:

```rust
let sum: u64 = vec![1, 2, 3, 4]
  .into_iter()
  .filter(|x| x % 2 == 0)
  .map(|x| x * 2)
  .sum();
```

This creates a construct where each element of the `Vec` (line 1, right side)
proceeds through iteration (line 2 turns the `Vec` into a source), being thrown
away or preserved based on inspection (line 3), transformed (line 4), and
collected (line 5, becomes line 1 left side).

Let me write this in some equivalent syntaxes, just to drive home why method
chains are good things to have and use.

No chaining:

```rust
let v: Vec<u64> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];
let i = v.into_iter();
let f = i.filter(|x| x % 2 == 0);
let m = f.map(|x| x * 2);
let sum: u64 = m.sum();
```

No methods:

```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];
let i = IntoIter::into_iter(v);
let f = Iterator::filter(i, |x| x % 2 == 0);
let m = Iterator::map(f, |x| x * 2);
let sum = Iterator::sum(m);
```

> I am conveniently using trait names rather than concrete type names, because
> the concrete type names here are horrific. To see what I mean, try compiling
> the following expression:
>
> ```rust
> let _: () = [1u8].into_iter().filter(|x| x % 2 == 0).map(|x| x * 2).sum();
> ```
>
> and see what the compiler tells you about the type mismatch.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m006 role="complementary"}

No intermediate variables at all:

```rust
let sum: u64 =
Iterator::sum(Iterator::map(
  Iterator::filter(
    IntoIter::into_iter(vec![1, 2, 3, 4]),
    |x| x % 2 == 0
  ),
  |x| x * 2
));
```

So, we can see that it is very useful to have pipelines through which data
“flows”. This example only shows a single pipeline inspecting and mutating data;
the data cannot mutate the pipeline – there is no easy way to apply different
behaviors depending on a condition. Changing behavior based on data is a
critical part of programming. The `if` and `match` constructs exist specifically
to choose a segment of the program based on what the data is.

### Mandatory Participation

Method chains require that each method in it return something, typically the
receiver or the result of transforming the receiver.

Often, however, types have methods that just change internal state and don’t
return anything! These completely break the method chain.

There is a crate called [`tap`] that provides a trait, `Tap`, with one function,
`tap(mut self, func: |&mut Self| -> _) -> Self`. The trait is implemented on all
types, so you can take any borrowing method and make it chaining instead, like
this:

```rust
let v = vec![5, 1, 4, 2, 3]
  .tap(|v| v.sort())
  .into_iter()
  .map(|x| x * 2)
  .collect::<Vec<_>>();
```

The `tap` runs `Vec::sort` (which has a signature `&mut Self -> ()`), but
takes the `Vec` by value and returns it as a value, for the rest of the chain to
consume.

<del>I maintain a fork of `tap`.</del>
<ins>I am now a maintainer of `tap`.</ins>

### Carrier Types

Rust borrows from the functional family of languages in that it has types that
exist soley to wrap other types and provide some additional meaning. The
archetypes of this pattern in Haskell are `Maybe` and `Either`; their analogues
in Rust are `Option` and `Result`.

These two types don’t exist or mean anything on their own. In fact, writing
either of those names out alone fails to compile in Rust, because there is no
such type as `Option` or `Result`[^4]. Instead, they are `Option<T>` and
`Result<T, E>` – programmers provide types `T` and `E` to insert into the
carriers in order to make fully constructed, concrete, types.

An `Option<T>` does *not* have the methods on it that an instance of the `T`
type does. `Option<T>` is its own type, and has its own methods. It and `Result`
are useful because they can expose their interior instance of `T` (if it exists)
and that instance can then have its own methods invoked on it.

These and other carrier types have methods on them that perform control flow
manipulation while inside a method chain, and I will describe this in the next
major section.

### Lifting to Carrier Types

The data with which a program wants to primarily work is typically a bare value
of some kind, and needs to be lifted into a carrier type before it can be used
in a method chain driven by the carrier.

A bare type can be wrapped in `Option<T>` by using the standard library’s `From`
or `Into` conversion traits: all types can be wrapped in `Option` to become
`Option<Type>::Some(instance)` with `val.into()` or `Option<_>::from(val)`.

An `Option` can be expanded into a `Result` of the same type and a new error
type by just adding the error type, with
`Option<T>::ok_or(e: E) -> Result<T, E>`.

> Note: unfortunately, due to the design of the `Into` trait and limitations of
> type theory mathematics, it is impossible to turn a bare value into a `Result`
> by writing `val.into().ok_or(err)`. The compiler cannot possibly resolve the
> expression `val.into()` as an `Option<T>` without putting that type somewhere
> (because there are infinite possible middle types that can be produced by an
> `into()` and implement an `ok_or()`), and it can’t be
> `val.into::<Option<_>>()` because that’s not the definition of `Into::into`.
>
> <ins>This is now in `tap`</ins>
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m014 role="complementary"}

## Carrier Flow

The carrier types define methods for transforming the data they carry, and for
being changed by that data. Rust defines control flow methods that can accept
values, or accept functions that are conditionally entered depending on the
interior data. This lets us recreate branching constructs entirely inside
methods.

### Linear Transformation

Once a bare value has been lifted into a carrier, the carrier can apply
transformations to it. The carrier also knows whether or not to apply them –
there is no use or sense in running a function that expects a value on the
`None` variant of an `Option`, or a function that operates on the success type
of a `Result` running on the `Err` variant or an error-handling function on the
`Ok` variant.

The carriers use the same `map` function from `Iterator`. They take a function
to run, and internally decide whether the carrier instance is suitable to run it
or not.

```rust
type R = Result<i32, &'static str>;

let r: R = Ok(5);
r.map(|x| x as u64 * 2); // change type and value
r.map_err(ToString::to_string); // no effect

let e = R = Err("error message");
e.map(|x| x * 2); // no effect
e.map_err(ToString::ToString);
```

`map` is capable of changing the success type of `Result`, or the presence type
of `Option`. The `map_err` function that acts on, possibly changing, the error
type. It does not exist on `Option`.

Both of these only run if the `Result` instance is the correct variant. `map`
only runs its function argument if the instance is `Result::Ok`, and likewise
`map_err` only runs when it receives a `Result::Err`.

The above code snippet produces, respectively, the following values:

```rust
Result::Ok::<u64, String>(10);
Result::Err::<i32, String>(String { "error message "});
```

The value returned by the function or closure given to `map` is the new
*interior value* of the carrier. This is something of which to be aware when
using `map` to briefly inspect the value! Return it, or use the `tap` crate.
This is also something of which to be aware when using `map` to apply a
function that returns a carrier rather than a bare value! Improper use of `map`
can result in deeply nested `Result<Option<Result<_, _>>, _>` towers, which is
likely not what you want. I will cover the equivalent to `Iterator::flat_map`
shortly.

### Value vs Value-Producing Function

Rust has a dogged determination for enabling laziness in an eager language. All
carrier methods that take external values, have variants of those same functions
that take a function which, when evaluated, produces a value of the correct
type. The difference between these takes-value and takes-function-produces-value
method names is typically a suffix on those that take producers.

There is an `and` which takes a value and an `and_then` which takes a producing
function; same for `or` and `or_else`, and `unwrap_or` and `unwrap_or_else`.
`Option` has even more: `ok_or` and `ok_or_else`, and `get_or_insert` and
`get_or_insert_with`.

### Branching

`map` is useful for transforming the interior data, but the interior data can’t
affect the method chain except by determining whether or not the transforms run.

There are two branching logic operations: `and` and `or`. These methods take
values or functions that enter the pipeline depending on the existing state of
the data, and correspond to `if`/`else` branch constructs. The `and` method
executes only if the carrier is in a “truthy” state, and the `or` method
executes only if the carrier state is “falsey”. For `Option`, the `Some` variant
is truthy and `None` falsey; for `Result`, the truthy variant is `Ok` and `Err`
is falsey.

> *Truthy* indicates semantic meaning that corresponds to the `true` Boolean
> condition, and *falsey* corresponds to `false`. These words are used in order
> to communicate the semantic Boolean condition while distinguishing that the
> specific Boolean values are not themselves present.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m002 role="complementary"}

This example demonstrates using the `and_then` and `or_else` combinators to
perform control flow branching without writing explicit `if`/`else` or `match`
constructs.

> *Combinator* is the name for methods that combine two existing values to
> produce a new value. I will use “combinator” to refer to the `and`/`or`
> methods and “transformer” to refer to the `map` methods.
{:.bq-info .iso7010 .m002 role="complementary"}

```rust
let a: Result<&'static str, &'static str> = Ok("/tmp/sample.txt");
let b: Result<File, &'static str> = a.and_then(|a_ok| {
  File::open(a_ok).map_err(|_| a_ok)
}); // Ok(File) if it opened, Err(&str) if it didn't
let c: Result<File, &'static str> = b.or_else(|b_err| {
  File::create(b_err).map_err(|_| "file creation failed")
}); // Ok(File) if it created, Err(&str) if it didn't
```

The above code takes an initial `Result` and runs it through the pipeline. Each
stage inspects both the variant of the `Result` and the data contained within
it. The first `and_then` is guaranteed to run, because it runs when the `Result`
is `Ok`.

The closure in it takes the value inside the `Ok` and runs a function body. In
this case, that means running `File::open` (which returns a `Result`) and
replacing the `io::Error` failure case with a `&'static str`. This is necessary
because each combinator can only change one type at a time. For this example, I
just returned the original text, but this time inside an `Err` wrapper, on
failure.

The `or_else` runs only if the `and_then` failed. If the `and_then` succeeded,
then the `Result` is carrying a `File` instance already, and we don’t need to
try the failure handlers. The `or_else`’s closure takes the value inside the
`Err` variant – here, the same text snippet with which the pipeline started –
and uses that to attempt to create a `File`, again replacing `Err(io::Error)`
with `Err(&'static str)` via `map_err` on failure.

It’s important to remember the distinction between `map` and `and_then`, and
between `map_err` and `or_else`. `map` and `map_err` change the interior of the
carrier *variant* on which they work; `and_then` and `or_else` change the
*whole carrier*.

### List of Combinators and Transformers

The standard library documentation on [`Option`] and [`Result`] is an excellent
resource, but for the sake of completeness I will list a short tour of the
combinator and transformer methods on those carriers here.

- `map`

  This runs a transformation function on the inner value of the carrier’s
  success variant, but leaves the failure variant unaffected.

  ```rust
  fn Option<T>::map<U>(self, op: impl FnOnce(T) -> U) -> Option<U>;
  fn Result<T, E>::map<U>(self, op: impl FnOnce(T) -> U) -> Result<U, E>;
  ```

- `map_err`

  Implemented only on `Result`, this runs the transformation function on the
  failure variant but leaves the success variant unaffected.

  ```rust
  fn Result<T, E>::map_err<F>(self, op: impl FnOnce(E) -> F) -> Result<T, F>;
  ```

To save space, I am not going to write out the signatures or descriptions for
the lazy versions of eager functions. The only difference is that the lazy
versions take a function to produce the value that the eager versions take
immediately.

- `map_or`/`map_or_else`

  Implemented only on `Option`, this serves as a shorthand for
  `.map().or().unwrap()`. It runs the transformation function on `Some` or
  replaces `None` with the fallback value, and the final value (produced by `op`
  or provided in `def`) is returned without the `Option` wrapping it.

  ```rust
  fn Option<T>::map_or<U>(self, def: U, op: impl FnOnce(T) -> U) -> U;
  ```

- `and`/`and_then`

  This replaces a success variant with `other`, but leaves the failure variant
  untouched. The function executed by `and_then` receives the inner data value
  of the success variant as its parameter.

  `and` unconditionally replaces its success value, so it can change its success
  type, but the error type produced by it might come from either the first
  carrier or the second, so both error sources must have the same type.

  ```rust
  fn Option<T>::and<U>(self, other: Option<U>) -> Option<U>;
  fn Result<T, E>::and<U>(self, other: Result<U, E>) -> Result<U, E>;
  ```

- `or`/`or_else`

  This replaces a failure variant with `other`, but leaves the success variant
  untouched. The function executed by `or_else` receives the inner data value of
  the failure variant as its parameter. (`None` has no inner value, so the
  function on `Option` has no input parameter.)

  The success output of `or` might come from either of the two carriers the
  method received, so both success values must have the same type. The first
  error variant is discarded, however, so the second carrier’s error type is
  unrestricted.

  ```rust
  fn Option<T>::or(self, other: Option<T>) -> Option<T>;
  fn Result<T, E>::or<F>(self, other: Result<T, F>) -> Result<T, F>;
  ```

- `get_or_insert`/`get_or_insert_with`

  This is an `Option`-only function that is equivalent in logical behavior to
  `or`/`or_else`, except rather than returning an `Option` to continue the
  pipeline, this returns a mutable borrow of the interior value. This is useful
  as a termination method rather than as a pipeline method, but it follows the
  same principles so I wanted to include it here all the same.

  ```rust
  fn Option<T>::get_or_insert(&mut self, other: T) -> &mut T;
  ```

Complex decision trees result in complexly nested closures, but they would also
result in complexly nested `if`/`else` structures if rewritten in the imperative
style. The advantage here is that the value produced by the branch is
automatically available for use in continuing the method chain, just as branches
in imperative style should have a unified state available after they conclude.

I want to stress how cool this is. A multi-stage pipeline can be expressed as
a sequence of method calls that directly name what they’re doing: “do this, and
then when it succeeds, do this next thing” or “do this, or else if that failed,
do this other thing instead”. The `or` functions should do their best to provide
a success value so that the pipeline can continue, but if they fail, the
pipeline is still able to continue.

### Lowering to Interior Types

When the pipeline is completed, you are left with a carrier type. The carriers
are not all that interesting once you’re done processing them; you want the
interior data back out.

`Result` can evaporate entirely with either `unwrap() -> T` to produce success,
or `unwrap_err` to produce the failure. Note that these will *crash your thread*
if the carrier is the wrong variant! They ask the carrier for something it does
not have. `unwrap_or` and `unwrap_or_else` and `unwrap_or_default` permit a
guaranteed unwrap by substituting a fallback value, running a fallback function,
or using the `Default` impl, on error.

`Result` can also step down to `Option` with `.ok() -> Option<T>`, producing
`Some(t)` from success and `None` from failure, and `.err() -> Option<E>`,
producing `Some(e)` from error and `None` from success.

`Option` has `unwrap`, `unwrap_or`, and `unwrap_or_else`. `unwrap` will panic on
`None`, while the others provide a fallback value if the `Option` was empty.

## Composition

Carrier composition works best not only when being extended “horizontally”, that
is, with method chains, and also when extended “vertically”, by calling
functions that return carriers. A common pattern in libraries is to have deep
function stacks that return the same carrier (`Option` or `Result`) and use the
`?` operator (governed by the still-unstable `Try` trait) to immediately punt
failure or continue working and return a success carrier when their work is
done.

The `?` operator serves as a very pleasant bridge between imperative and carrier
styles, by producing successful interior values in the current scope or
returning failed interior values. It is tricky to use deep in nested closures,
though, so keep some care with its use and the general fractal complexity of
your code.

The following snippets of code are identical ways of finding a file, reading
from it, and using the contents:

```rust
fn grab(path: &str) -> Option<i32> {
  let mut f = if let Ok(f) = File::open(path) {
    f
  } else {
    File::open("/path/to/fallback").ok()?
  };
  let mut s = String::new();
  match f.read_to_string(&mut s) {
    Ok(_) => {},
    Err(_) => return None,
  }
  match s.trim().parse() {
    Ok(n) => Some(n),
    Err(_) => None
  }
}
```

Line 2 attempts to open the given path. If that fails, line 5 attempts to open a
fallback path. If *that* fails, the function bails, otherwise it now has a file
handle.

Line 8 attempts to read the contents of the file. This might succeed, in which
case nothing needs to happen, or it might fail, in which case the function
bails.

Line 12 attempts to parse the contents of the file, returning the value parsed
or nothing.

There’s nothing wrong with writing in this style! It’s perfectly performant,
it’s clear about what is going on, and the type system ensures that we wrote the
code such that every `let name =` binding either has a value, or the function
returned failure.

But there is a *lot* of noise in the `if let`/`else` and `match` structures.

```rust
fn grab(path: &str) -> Option<i32> {
  File::open(path)
    .or_else(|_| File::open("/tmp/foo.txt"))
    .ok()
    .and_then(|mut f| {
      let mut s = String::new();
      f.read_to_string(&mut s)
        .ok().map(|_| s)
    })
    .and_then(|s| s.parse().ok())
}
```

This is shorter, has less extraneous line noise (lines 9 and 14 of the first
sample are completely useless to us!), and displays exactly the sequence of
events and behavior we want.

Line 2 opens the path. If that didn’t work, line 3 tries another path. Note that
`.or(File::open("…"))` would unconditionally open the other file, then close it
if the first file opened. Line 4 throws away any error.

Line 5 turns the file into a string, by passing the file handle into a closure
that allocates a string and tries to read the file into it. That closure must
return `Option<String>`, so `.ok()` downgrades the `Result` to an `Option` and
then `.map` replaces the byte count of `read_to_string` with the string into
which it read, then closure returns that.

Line 10 then attempts a parse, and if the parse succeeds, we get a `Some`, and
if not, a `None`! Overall, this is much tidier than the first example. We also
gain the advantage of having the combinator method names tell us what is
happening very closely to the way we would write the function body out in plain
English:

1. Open the file, or else if that fails, open a different file.
1. And then, try to read the file to a string. If that worked, keep the string.
1. And then try to parse the string and let us know how it went.

Open, or else open, transform by reading, and then parse. Nice and clear.

## Code Generation

Here’s an ugly secret: there’s not really any such thing as eliminating work.
What the compiler wants done, must be done. Those `match` and `if let`/`else`
statements in the last example? They still have to exist. The compiler refuses
to let you get away with not checking the variants of carriers just because you
used nifty methods. Those methods are in the *standard library*, not in the
compiler. They’re not magic. You can write your own carrier types and your own
combinator methods and they’ll work exactly the same.

Those methods *all* have a `match self { … }` branch in them. They *all* check
for `Ok` vs `Err` or `Some` vs `None` and conditionally do things. The reason
the two definitions of `fn grab` that I wrote have the same behavior is because
they expand to the exact same code.

You might be thinking that it really hurts to repeatedly check a value for the
exact same condition! The `map` method has to check the variant on the carrier,
but the imperative version we wrote knows that if execution reaches that line,
then things are fine, and has no check.

So what’s the advantage of writing a different style of code if it makes our
programs worse?

It doesn’t.

`rustc` is well aware of the method pipeline idioms in `Iterator` and `Result`.
Because it knows that the combinators only do work on one branch, and have
immediate returns on the other, it can inline our method calls and then combine
branch bodies that have logically identical or related conditions. The redundant
“return if failed or do work if succeeded” and “do nothing if succeeded or do
handling if failed” checks can be reordered and combined to something much more
like this:

```rust
fn grab(path: &str) -> Option<i32> {
  let (mut fail: bool, mut file: File) = File::open(path);
  if fail {
    (fail, file) = File::open(fallback);
  }
  if fail { return None };
  let mut s = String::new();
  fail, _ = file.read_to_string(&mut s);
  if fail { return None };
  let (fail, num) = s.parse();
  if fail { return None };
  return Some(num);
}
```

Because of a Weird Quirk[^5] of modern CPUs, `if flag { return; }` statements
are *effectively* zero-cost. By arranging the code like this, the instruction
stream in the CPU doesn’t have to jump around; it just goes down the line and in
the event that the failure flag becomes true, it can exit the function cheaply.

The one major downside of using carrier types (that, interestingly, throwing
languages like Swift [can avoid][jck]) is the necessity of moving the interior
values around to be in the right slot for the carrier’s discriminant.

Rust has field-reordering optimizations in play that allow the compiler to move
enum discriminants around as it chooses. As of this writing, I don’t *believe*
Rust is able to do much optimization in the way of separating the discriminant
far enough from the value slot that it can completely avoid register or stack
rearranging between successive manipulations, but the possibility is certainly
there.

One idea I’ve seen kicked around is to officially “bless” the `Option` and
`Result` enums in the compiler (like how `core::nonzero` works) and teach the
compiler to represent the carrier types, in applicable situations such as method
chains and deep call stacks, as not tuples of `(discriminant, value)` but as a
register or stack slot for the value only, and use a CPU status register or a
special-treatment value register or stack slot for the discriminants.

Ultimately, Rust’s code generation on `Iterator` and `Result` is good enough
that *in the vast majority of cases*, you don’t need to think about
microoptimizations like obsessively linear code or branch deduplication. You’ll
have much more prominent performance costs doing other work before you need to
worry about these things.

## Conclusion

Rust strongly favors using method chains to concisely express intent and program
flow. It provides types and methods capable of producing control-flow effects
by using method calls rather than branch and loop constructs, and these can be
used to great effect to make your source code easier to read and modify.

Furthermore, by abstracting the details of the control flow and byte
representation below the visible types, this style of writing frees the compiler
to make powerful optimization choices without sacrificing flexibility and
clarity at the surface level.

The threading pattern (methods that take `self` and return `Self`) and the
converter pattern mean that you can create pipeline sequences on any type, not
just the carrier enums or `Iterator` type adapters. Use of the `tap` crate and
`std::convert`’s conversion traits means that these patterns can be applied to
a wide variety of types, even those that didn’t explicitly design their API to
accomodate them.

And most importantly, the conclusion common to almost all Rust posts:

Code clarity, type surety, and performance, are not mutually exclusive! We can
have all three.

Thanks for reading this 5,600-word monstrosity. You’ve reached the end! You’re
free![^6]

## Endnotes

\[^1\]: *Technically* the order of evaluation of sibling arguments to a function
is implementation defined, and cannot be assumed constant or reliable. In
practice, it’s almost always depth-first search, left to right, in source code
order.

\[^2\]: I write enough asides in the main body. The way you indirectly invoke a
class method on a class pointer in C++ is unpleasant. Here’s how it looks:

```cpp
class Example { public: void foo(); };
void (Example::* method)(void) = &Example::foo;
Example ex;
ex.*method(); // calls ex.foo();
Example* ex = new Example();
ex->*method(); // calls (*ex).foo();
```

Those are not “instance calls (deref method-pointer)”. `.*` and `->*` are two
more operators in the language, and classes can override them.

\[^3\]: Work is in progress to allow arbitrary receiver types, not just raw
values and references, as long as the receiver’s outer type implements `Deref`
to the main type. This will allow defining methods like:

```rust
struct Example;
impl Example {
  fn value(self);
  fn borrow(&self);
  fn borrowmut(&mut self);
  fn ownptr(Box<Self>);
  fn rc(Rc<Self>);
  fn arc(Arc<Self>);
  fn borrowarcmut(&mut Arc<Self>);
}
```

Each method can only be called on objects that match the receiver type, and in
the function body, the `self` keyword will have the fully specified type without
any `Deref`s towards the `impl` type applied by the compiler.

[^4]: Expressing only the base name of a generic type requires a language
feature called “higher-kinded types” and Rust just does not have it. It’s a hard
problem to run solely in the compiler, and Rust does not have the compiler
available at runtime via an interpreter or a reflection system.

[^5]: It turns out, programs follow a really useful heuristic of “if you haven’t
done it before, you probably won’t do it now; if you have done it before, you
will probably do it again”. That is, conditions to jump backwards in code
(loops) are considered likely to be taken, but conditions to jump forwards in
code (`if` stacks) are considered *un*likely. Thus, where the compiler can
reörder the code to have an extremely linear main path and use `if` to handle
the edge cases, the CPU will rip through the main path with little cost, and
only if the `if` condition turns out to be true will it pay the jump penalty.

[^6]: You’ve reached the end of the bonus content! You’re *really* free!

[cdecl]: https://cdecl.org/
[jck]: https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0235-add-result-to-the-standard-library/17752/126?u=joe_groff
[`tap`]: https://myrrlyn.net/crates/tap
[`Option`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html
[`Result`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/enum.Result.html
