---
title: Hermaeus and Simple Tools
date: 2016-10-12
tags:
- reddit
- ruby
- software design
category: misc
---

1. ToC
{:toc}

# What Is Hermaeus

In case you didn’t know, and haven’t yet looked at the “My *TES* Writings” part
of the navigation menu, one of my larger hobbies involves hanging out on a forum
for discussing and creating lore for the *Elder Scrolls* universe. If you hadn’t
figured out I was a huge nerd from the computer stuff yet, well, I am.

The community in which I found myself involved is a wonderfully vibrant place,
and we pride ourselves on the level of volume and quality of posts the community
members create to talk about existing lore, or make new things up for each other
to talk about. The best of these are collected into a giant list called the
Compendium.

Unfortunately, the Compendium doesn’t **copy** the posts stored in it; it just
references the original posts. Which means that any damage done to the originals
is damage done to the Compendium as well. That is not the kind of behavior
desirable in a library, but there hasn’t been much we could do about it. By the
time anyone (by which I mean, I) realized there was a problem, the Compendium
had two thousand entries and so manually copying all the posts that still
existed was obviously not going to happen.

As it so happens, though, I had been reading up on reddit’s API for a different
project on the subreddit, and so I decided to take matters into my own hands.

In about six hours (I’ll let you guess which six… it was 2300-0500), I had drawn
up a prototype script that was capable of logging into reddit, finding the
Compendium index page, sniffing out the reference links, following them, and
downloading the posts. It took my script over an hour to crawl the 1,951 links
on the index page and download their contents. It took me about ten minutes into
that process to realize that many of the documents I was saving just said
`[deleted]`, so I tacked in the functionality to inspect a post to see if it was
deleted or not before saving, which brought the archive down to 1,634 posts.

This may come as a surprise to some, but certain mental states have significant
influence on programming ability. Sleep deprivation and intoxication are the two
more prominent ones, to the point where there’s a joke about the ideal BAC for
programming inspiration. For me, sleeplessness is my drug of choice. And it
actually works!

Unfortunately, the genius of exhaustion’s code is matched by its ugliness.

So I scrapped the first script and rebuilt Hermaeus properly over the course of
the day after that morning, when I could approach it with some sleep and mulling
over the design.

I’m proud to say that Hermaeus is my first actually useful tool, officially
published, able to be used by someone who isn’t me. Granted, it’s a Ruby CLI
script, so the audience isn’t going to be much wider, but it’s a start.

# Things I Learned

## Forever Is A Myth

The main lesson of Hermaeus is that it is never too soon to start making backups
of important things. The internet doesn’t *actually* mean forever; in fact, the
internet is incredibly transient in most cases. There’s so much information
generated and published these days that we can’t help but lose huge quantities
of it in the churn, and most people don’t notice. Unless, like /r/teslore did,
they make lists of links and call that a library, and slowly those links start
dying.

## RTFM

Another lesson from my work on Hermaeus was to **READ THE FANCY MANUAL**. it’s
a core part of programmer jargon for a reason, and a good lesson for everyday
life.

Do you know *why* the first Hermaeus took over an hour to chew through the
Compendium, and even then it crashed several times and I had to manually adjust
its selection window and restart it?

I didn’t realize I could ask reddit for posts in large batches, so I was making
an individual request for each entry, and waiting the requisite one second
between requests to keep the server from cutting me off. That made the process
spend the vast, vast majority of its time waiting on the network, which is never
a good bound to have on your program’s operating speed because the network is
*slow*.

After I read the documentation on the reddit API and discovered I could make
batch requests, I also learned that a batch of nearly two thousand is too big
for the network to carry. So I wrote a monkeypatch for Ruby’s `Array` class to
break up an array into chunks, which worked wonderfully, not realizing that
such a method already existed in the standard library and I just had to turn it
on.

But at least it was good exercise.

## Tests Are Good

I didn’t use formal testing on either implementation of Hermaeus. I really
should have; that failure is why Hermaeus is version 1.0.2 instead of 1.0.0; I
deployed it to a clean machine and promptly found two bugs because I was testing
in my development environment, not in a cleanroom.

I also spent easily as much time in the debugger as I did actually writing code.
Ruby’s `pry` console is a magical, wonderful, tool, and I had to use it in depth
every time I wanted to slightly tweak a function or check what was coming out of
the network.

## Goals Are Also Good

I set out to build Hermaeus with a pretty clear goal: Look at two types of index
page on /r/teslore, dereference the links on those pages, and scrape *those*
posts to the filesystem.

Hermaeus does exactly that.

I started getting feature creep at the end; the Archivist class which actually
writes files to disk also reformats the text.

Rather than keep going down the rabbit hole of adding more features onto
Hermaeus (though I do have some planned, such as: storing in a database;
performing general scraping without a specific index; updating stored posts with
extra data like categories), I stopped at a 1.0 release and left that list
sitting in my TODO list.

## Utility Means Everything

It doesn’t matter how well designed a piece of software is, if it never gets
used. Hermaeus is completely useless right now, because its output – a slew of
Markdown text – just sits on the filesystem. It’s like a library with no front
door and no catalogue cards.

So my next project is to make a web interface so that Hermaeus can be put to
real use.

# Conclusion

Programming *really* needs to be more mainstream and commonplace. Computers are
a huge and integral part of modern life.

And yet many people have no idea how to actually control the machines they use;
we stick to pre-assembled tools and interfaces and if there isn’t a convenient
solution to a problem, the problem goes unsolved or badly solved. It’s like only
eating frozen dinners because you don’t cook, and what’s worse, most houses
don’t have a kitchen. (I’m exaggerating slightly, but seriously, programming on
Windows has higher hurdles than on macOS, which has higher hurdles than on
Linux.)

I spent a day or so thinking about this and came up with a simple tool that
fills a need I didn’t even realize I had until recently. It’s nothing special to
look at, it’s not a groundbreaking new development in terms of functionality,
but it’s useful for my life. And being able to make little conveniences like
that is incredibly empowering, and something on which many people are missing
out.

Everyone has unique lives and needs. Make things that fit you, rather than
trying to make you fit things that already exist. It’s the little touches that
make all the difference.

This applies to pretty much everything; I personally just happen to have the
most talent at applying it to computers. I imagine carpenters decry IKEA much in
the same way, yet here I sit at an IKEA desk. But hey, at least I did something.
