---
title: "Immigration Ban"
date: 2017-01-28
tags:
- personal
- politics
category: misc
---

[![](2017-01-28-immigration-ban/IMG_20170128_120213.jpg){:.right}][1]

I woke up today in 2017 Utah. I'd had a long week at work, including twelve
hours spent in the office on a company snow day, and was looking forward to a
nice day of throwing myself down a mountain in the name of fear and fun.

Once of the nice things about Utah mountain ranges is that there's no cell
signal in there, except intermittently at the top – just enough for me to post
some pretty sick Instagram pics, but when skiing, the goal is to spend as little
time as possible at the peak or with the phone out.

I went home, at about 17:00 Mountain Time, two hours behind the East Coast, and
found myself in 1930 Germany.

An executive order had been issued that barred entry into the U.S. for any
national of seven Middle Eastern states. This order was ostensibly justified by
9/11 and intended to increase American security, yet covered none of the states
whose citizens were involved in 9/11 or any American terror event since.
Furthermore, while this was ostensibly a ban solely on refugees and new
immigrants – which was despicable enough – it was applied to Lawful Permanent
Residents, who are on the path to citizenship and carry “green cards”, which are
official U.S. identifying documents and proof of *significant* investigation and
vetting.

Any moral person should be outraged by such a blatant discriminatory event. At
no point in American history has an immigration exclusion law *not* turned out
to be a terrible humanitarian decision. One of the most commonly referenced
events was the American policy of turning away Jewish refugees in the '30s, and
many of those refugees were later killed in the Holocaust. This action is
especially despicable on America’s part because many of the affected countries
are suffering ravages or war for which we are in part responsible. I am not
decrying military action here, but if we are to claim that we are a civilized
first world country with a strong moral imperative, we cannot deny humanitarian
aid to civilians whose lives we damage or destroy as a result of our actions.
Furthermore, we *certainly* cannot deny humanitarian aid to those whose lives
are ruined by those we name the enemy.

This should sit poorly, to say the least, with any moral citizen. It certainly
does with me. My revulsion is even stronger, however, given how close to home it
hits.

This order affects people fleeing from states where the U.S. has been engaging
in military action, and explicitly paints those nationals as “threats to
American security,” based on events from fifteen years ago. I am not Muslim, nor
do I have any heritage from these countries, so I am not directly impacted by
this order.

I am, however, of German descent. During and after World War II, anti-German
sentiment ran strong in America. German families fled a ruined Germany in the
aftermath of the war. One such family brought my mother.

Fifteen years after World War II, President Eisenhower did *not* issue a ban on
Germans, ostensibly to protect American interests against German aggression as
seen in the War. Fifteen years after World War II, President Eisenhower did
*not* issue a blatantly illegal, ill-considered executive order that sent my
mother, a young girl born in West Germany in 1955, back to Germany while her
parents were in New York City. Fifteen years after World War II, President
Eisenhower did *not* strip my mother and her parents of their green cards under
duress, did *not* demonize them as examples of German aggression threatening
American safety, did *not* throw them back into post-war Germany despite the
hope and promise of a better life in America.

I am alive today because in the 1960s, America didn’t quash immigration from the
Axis powers. I am the child of an immigrant family, who endured Allied bombing
raids on their home and livelihoods, who endured a dictatorial regime and left
the rubble behind. I am the child of a family who came to America and are some
of the most patriotic, enthusiastic Americans I know, because they remember the
alternatives.

I refuse to accept that I have been blessed to have this life simply because my
mother and her family got lucky to immigrate at a time when America wasn’t
bothering to enact such bigotry and hatred against civilians remotely associated
with an enemy from fifteen years ago. And I refuse to accept that years from
now, a child of immigrants coming to America for a better life, a child who will
be born a natural citizen and never knowing the hardship his parent fled, a
child who should be just like me, is ceasing to exist because of such abhorrent
actions today.

My life should not be a special case. I should not be lucky. I should not get to
be an American simply because Mr. Trump wasn’t in power when my mother’s family
made the crossing.

We should all stand against this despicable act because it is morally wrong. I
certainly do. I also stand against it because the only thing keeping it from
targeting me, is a matter of timing.

I have been given a tremendous blessing in my mother’s citizenship. I cannot
stand idly by and withhold that same blessing from others in her shoes, who will
have children who will hopefully be in my shoes.

I am not an immigrant. I owe my life to a German couple who braved the war and
post-war hardships to bring their young daughter to America, and to the American
society that accepted them, and to the man from a poverty-stricken Iowa family
who did not see foreigners as Others, who loved her and married her and became
my parents.

When someone says they hate immigrants from areas against which we have taken
military action, they say they hate my mother. When someone rejects the premise
that other people might deserve humanity, they spit in the face of my father.
When someone says immigrants can contribute nothing to society, they say my life
is worthless.

This isn’t an abstract problem. This isn’t something for other people to deal
with. This affects all of us, in ways we may not even be able to comprehend at
first glance. This affects me, and I **will not** stand for it. I **will not**
accept that it is okay to arbitrarily classify immigrants, who may be anywhere
from first contact to carrying green cards on their way to naturalization, as
Others to be cast out. I **will not** state, in my thoughts or in my words, in
what I have done or what I have failed to do, that I, a second-generation
immigrant from a state with which America was recently at war, deserve a life
that is being denied to those following in my family’s footsteps.

I sincerely hope that America does not become the country my mother’s family
endured and fled. I don’t know what power I have to prevent that, but I know
that I must do everything in my power to ensure that my family’s struggle was
not in vain, and that the struggles of other families like mine are not either.

For many Americans, this is an abstract moral issue. I applaud those taking a
stand even without a direct stake. For me, though, it’s **personal.**

[1]: https://instagr.am/myrrlyn "I h*ckin love mountains"
