---
title: DV
date: 2017-09-21
category: misc
tags:
- personal
---

1. ToC
{:toc}

# Prelude

I’m not really sure how to talk about this, or even if I should. I haven’t been
exactly secretive with this story, but I’ve also never put it all in one place
that you can access without having me directly and actively tell you before. And
… I have a lot of conditioning that tells me I should keep this to myself, for a
variety of reasons including stoicism, conformance to American masculinity, and
the fact that many people have things far worse than me so I should shut up and
eat my vegetables and be glad of it.

But you know what

This stuff matters. Maybe my writing this down will be useful to someone.

Worst case scenario, just close the page. I’m not forcing you to be here. Also,
you can and may want to close this page at any point during the story. It may
get unpleasant to read; it’s surely proven unpleasant to write. There’s no
expectation or reward for reaching the end.

# Background

We don’t need an agonizingly in-depth exploration or explanation of how I got to
this point, but some basic information is required.

In 2011 I began my freshman year at college and I met a girl and our friendship
consisted of mutual repressed romantic tension and un-repressed just beating the
tar out of each other. No one knows how or why that started or continued.

In 2012 we lightly hooked up, and were not good at it.

In 2013 she started dating someone else and I did not take it well which was not
great because I didn’t know if I had feelings for her or not but she did ask me
out and I panicked and said I probably shouldn’t accept and continued with some
prior behaviors.

In 2014 I think I accidentally was her affair for a few weeks.

In 2015 she dated a mutual friend of ours and I dated my landlady. Other story.

In January 2016 we started dating each other.

# The Relationship

I’m going to call her Katrina. That’s not her name, or even the first letter of
her name; I’m naming her after the hurricane.

Katrina and I basically spent four and change years in a perpetual
will-we-won’t-we cycle where neither of us were “will” at the same time. By New
Year’s 2016, she was very firmly mad at me and I was not sure if we were going
to ever talk to or see each other again. We had become very close over the four
years in college together, tumultuous though it was. I want to be very clear
that we cared a great deal for each other even though we both hurt each other a
lot through mistakes and miscommunication. It’s important to me that you know
that.

Only two of our clique were still in college at this point; me because I changed
majors, our friend because he took a year off to go fight cancer. She came back
to our college to help him move in. He texted me and said “hey Katrina’s here;
come over let’s have a party” and so I did.

Katrina and I started out not really acknowledging each other but as the night
wore on and the bottles wore down she warmed up to me and soon enough events
transpired. We were both pretty drunk so judgment and tact were no longer with
us, but nothing happened that we didn’t want to happen and there were plenty of
things that we did want but didn’t manage.

We woke up happy, she drove the two hours back to her place in Michigan, and I
went to school.

Two weeks later she came back and we decided to figure out what we were, and I
put together the courage to ask if she’d be my girlfriend and we officially
started dating. She told me she was unhappy I was still living with my landlady
who, as I mentioned, was now also my ex (and also now in a new relationship of
her own, to a man to whom she is now married, again, other story).

I don’t need to walk you step by step through each part of this, and I will try
to avoid doing so. Now that we were both of legal age though it is probably
useful to note that we spent a lot of our weekends together during the semester
in … altered states. We had a drinking problem, and that problem was that we
were young and dumb and good at it.

Sometime that night, Katrina asked me with how many girls had I slept before
her. I answered. She punched me in the side of my head. I blinked and it was
morning and she was holding me in her lap with an ice pack. She called me an
asshole and went home. I called her and apologized and said that I never wanted
to hurt her I was just afraid of doing so and didn’t know what I was doing and
could she forgive me and she said yes and I was happy.

----

For the last weekend of January, she was back, and I asked my former roommate to
come hang out with us one last time and he did. She and he had had a falling out
their senior year and so Katrina was mad at me that I invited him and decided
that Indiana January was a great time to disappear from the house for hours
without warning.

Katrina explained that she was very upset with – I’ll call him Frankie; it’s not
his name or even the first letter of it – Frankie for his conduct last year and
with me for inviting him here even though they had both kept this very secret
from me (not that it was hard) and I apologized and said I just wanted to see
one of my only two close male friends and she told me I was wrong and a bad
boyfriend and I said I would try to be better.

<aside markdown="block">
For what it’s worth, I’ll be Frankie’s best man in May. I still haven’t seen him
again since that night.

Katrina won the battle but not the war, I guess.
</aside>

February went okay. I screwed up Valentine’s Day and that was legitimately my
bad and we only fought about it a little, at the time. It came back to haunt me
a lot though.

----

In March, Katrina came through our college town and picked up our mutual friend
to continue on to another friend’s house. She told me to come along and I said
okay and drove myself behind her and this was apparently the incorrect choice
because she managed to shake me on the freeway and then never texted me the
address to which we were headed.

I got our host friend to text me the address and I showed up about fifteen
minutes behind her and the house was empty. They had all gone for a walk to get
fast food or something.

Katrina did not acknowledge my existence when they got back. It was awkward. We
all drank, because that’s what we did. Sooner or later, the rest of the group
noticed she and I were being uncool and contrived to get us in the same room and
then pull a disappearing act.

Katrina yelled at me about why my driving separately was so rude. I apologized.
We had both been drinking pretty heavily; she because that’s what she did and me
because I felt it would help me mend things. She slipped and I went to catch her
and hold her standing upright. She bit my shoulder and spit a chunk of my flesh
into the toilet bowl and then threw up in it. We took a shower. We went to
sleep. We went home. I told her I loved her and that I was doing my sincere best
and that I knew it wasn’t very good. She told me she loved me too and she knew I
was trying but after all these years and everything that had happened between us
it was hard to be patient with me still.

She took me to her parents’ for spring break. On the drive she explained why she
didn’t like the Boy Scouts as an organization or those of use who made Eagle in
particular. I did not reply, as I did not feel that I had anything meaningful to
say and did not want to get in a fight about it. She assumed that my silence was
because I was mad at her. She became mad at me and did not talk either.

The next day we noticed that my shoulder was infected, which tends to happen
when a human bites out part of your flesh and you don’t go to the doctor because
that would require answering questions to which you do not have answers. She put
on antibiotic and a bandage and explained very patiently to me that if I had not
put my arm so close to her mouth then she would not have bitten me. I apologized
and told her I’d do better in the future.

I missed Easter Mass because her family did not know I was Catholic and I did
not want to have that conversation. Katrina told me she was disappointed that I
wasn’t acting very Christian.

----

After the school year ended, we had an argument about whether I should live with
her or not. She told me that if I stayed with my parents we would likely break
up and my parents said I would have to make my own choice but they would love
and support me no matter what and so I went to live with Katrina.

Two weeks later, my mom called and asked if I knew about the letter Katrina had
written to my dad. I did not. Mom read it to me and informed me that they loved
and missed me but that woman was no longer welcome in their house or company.

Katrina and I fought about this a lot. I did not understand why she was mad at
my parents and her explanations did not make much sense to me, but she and I are
from rather different folks and I suspect neither of our families made sense to
the other. I did not want to break contact with my parents, as that is a rather
drastic action and I never really knew what was going on, but Katrina explained
that I had to choose between them and her and so I stayed with her. I loved her
and she loved me and we talked about getting married soon.

During one of our arguments, she took some swings at me. I let a few land but
then decided I didn’t want to get hit anymore and hugged her to pin her arms to
her side. She bit my other shoulder and scraped off a lot of skin but at least
didn’t tear out a chunk this time. She got free and went to bed and locked the
door and so I slept on the couch and waited for my shoulder to scab up.

----

My birthday is in mid-July. We got along very well that day. We went on a date
and didn’t fight. We were happy. We got pleasantly drunk and watched a movie and
I wanted nothing more than to hold that moment forever.

I think it was the next day but I don’t remember. It might have been because the
precipitating event for this was that I went to go see my parents for an event
established long before The Letter And The Ultimatum and when I came back
Katrina was very upset with me and declared that I had to stop betraying her for
my terrible family and the picture of us was crumpled on the ground and I picked
up all the broken glass so the dog wouldn’t hurt herself.

We drank. I didn’t think that was a good idea but Katrina had a head start on me
and made me go along so that I’d be able to talk. After all, sober me wasn’t
very good at it.

She yelled at me about my awful parents and how I was being unsupportive and
hurtful and I tried to explain why I didn’t know what I was doing or what I was
supposed to do in a way that would make sense and she cried and I sat quietly
panicking and she tried to hit me but by this time was not sober and hurt her
thumb doing so and called the police because I hurt her.

After I recovered from my metaphorical heart attack, I told her I was sorry for
dislocating her thumb and that I didn’t mean to hurt her and won’t she please
stop and since we had both sobered up in panic she calmly explained to dispatch
that she bungled unlocking her phone and it did the emergency dial instead and
she knew better than to hang up on it and have the police show up anyway for no
reason, thank you ma’am I’m sorry for wasting your time ma’am have a good night
ma’am.

She put her phone down to get another drink and I hid it. She came back and
asked where it was and I said I didn’t know I thought she had it and so she took
her pistol from her purse and pointed at me and said to give her the fucking
phone and I said I didn’t have it please believe me because in truth I didn’t
and I damn sure wasn’t going to tell her where they were *now*.

After she went to bed I took the box of pistol ammunition from her nightstand
and hid it in the closet of the other bedroom but I didn’t know where her purse
pistol was so of the three guns in the household, one was out of commission, one
was a carbine in her car, and her purse was undeterred. I figured I did the best
I could to keep her life from getting ruined by an accidental GSW infliction and
went to sleep.

We fought again the next day and I really didn’t want to get hit anymore so I
went to block one of her swings and I accidentally hit her jaw with the base of
my palm and she cried and I apologized and I meant it because I really hadn’t
hit her since 2011 and I very much did not want to be an abusive boyfriend. I
hate abusive boyfriends and I wanted to be good for her and I knew that I hadn’t
been and I didn’t want to add physical violence to all the emotional damage that
I’d obviously been doing for the years we’d known each other. After all, if I
hadn’t been doing that, we wouldn’t have been having these problems would we? We
loved each other very much and so the cracks in that were evidence that we’d
been hurt each other and I knew a lot of it was my fault because she told me it
was and really she had a much better grasp of the situation than I did.

I loved Katrina very much, after all, and I really didn’t deserve her patience
and care that she gave me. I was not a good friend or boyfriend and I tried my
best but it was not often good enough and that made her sad and upset and angry
sometimes.

I truly was in love with Katrina. I’m writing this as sincerely as I can. She
meant the world to me and I wanted to marry her and take her last name because
mine had been poisoned in her opinion and when she was happy I was overjoyed and
thrilled to be with her. Her smile lit up my world. Her laugh was music. Her
screams were thunder and her tears were a river in flood and I loved her.

Katrina kicked the coffee table – to be clear, a cheap Walmart thing made of
particle board and prayers, but still, not inconsequential – and I went fetal
position to not get my arms hurt on impact and it hit me in the back of the head
and I blinked and there was dried blood down my neck and shirt and she was gone
so I pulled myself to the couch and blinked again and it was the morning.

Katrina pulled me to my feet and I fell down and she caught me and walked me to
the shower. We showered and she washed the blood off of my skin and out of my
hair and told me she was sorry about the table and I think I mumbled a response
because I didn’t really know what was going on.

I can remember this abstractly, like it’s a movie of somebody else that I saw
once. It’s third person and the rememberer and the actor are two different
people and I know he’s dressed up like me but I don’t see him as me. I don’t
know where I am but I’m not in the scene. I would be gone for a few days.

I think this might be what a minor concussion is.

I did not go to a doctor. It is hard to walk into a door with the back of your
head. I was not in a position to drive and I couldn’t ask Katrina to take me.

We didn’t talk about the coffee table. I bought a replacement a few weeks later
and we ignored the blood on the couch pillow.

We stopped drinking.

Things were good for a few weeks!

----

We went on vacation to Canada with her family for a week. She had to leave all
her guns behind because you can’t bring those into Canada with an Indiana ID. I
had a good time because the nature is pretty and I like the Great Lakes but I
did not as much care for fishing and that’s about all her dad and his brothers
wanted to do.

Also I remember being annoyed that one of Katrina’s complaints about my family
was that we were ostentatiously wealthy, with a nicely decorated house and more
than one car per person, and there we were in Canada on a yearly two-week
vacation with her dad’s two trucks and two boats and motorcycle and her uncle’s
truck and boat and 30-ft RV.

I can count on one hand the number of family vacations I’ve taken that aren’t
Boy Scout camp. We have never owned a boat or a motorcycle or casually driven
inefficient trucks everywhere for purposes other than moving large volumes or
masses. Her family didn’t believe in small cars.

----

In mid-August, we each spent the weekend at our respective parents’ houses. She
left first. I packed as much of my stuff as I thought wouldn’t be noticeable in
my car and dropped it off at home and went to a party with some of my friends
from high school that I hadn’t seen in a while because Katrina thought I might
cheat on her with them – I didn’t – and we talked about this a bit and they told
me I should really get out. I said I was thinking about it but I was afraid that
I was giving up early on what could really be an incredible life with the woman
I loved. They reminded me that love doesn’t put three different bite scars on
your arms or two head injuries or put a gun in your face.

When I think about it all at once like that, yeah, I guess those are a little
problematic.

Katrina and I came back home Sunday and we were each cold and distant to each
other. I was lost in my head agonizing about whether I should hurt her like this
or just man up and work forward. After all, I loved her, and she loved me.

We didn’t talk Monday either, so I spent the day filling up my trunk with more
stuff.

Monday night we talked, finally. She said she had been thinking over the weekend
and was nearly resolved to break up with me because we weren’t doing well and
she didn’t think she could continue forward with a boyfriend who kept hurting
her. I said I understood and I was sorry.

Tuesday she went to work and I put everything in my car and spent a couple hours
in what I guess is a panic attack? My breathing was irregular and my pulse was
racing and I couldn’t stop pacing and shaking and I was so afraid she’d come
home early and I wouldn’t have a good explanation for this and how could I hurt
her like this and shouldn’t I stay didn’t I love her weren’t the last five years
meaningful didn’t she deserve more from me?

I put my keys on the coffee table and I left. I called my mom and said I didn’t
want to come home because I was afraid Katrina would come look for me and mom
should take precautions because she might be distraught. Mom told me she was so
glad I was okay and to come home when I was ready and that she wouldn’t let
Katrina near me.

# The Aftermath

I drove a couple states away to see a dear friend of mine, someone Katrina
despised so thoroughly that she’d forbidden me from talking to them and had even
broken into my phone to clean up my Facebook friends list, including this one.
So if I unfriended you last year, that’s why.

<aside markdown="block">
Don’t use biometric unlocks. Fucking. Don’t.
</aside>

I missed a lot of calls from Katrina. I still have the transcripts of her
voicemails. They’re angry. They’re despairing. They plead and beg and curse.
Google censors the curses. I didn’t listen to them.

My friend had to go to work and I told them I’d behind and read and try to sleep
and definitely not talk to Katrina.

Katrina called.

I let it ring through to voicemail.

Katrina called.

I picked up.

She asked where I was and I lied. I remembered telling her a truth that she
wouldn’t want to hear and the consequences.

She said she drove to my parents’ and I wasn’t there and she was worried about
me.

She said she was so sorry and that she’d do better and she knew she had been
hurting me and wouldn’t I please come home so we could talk about this and try
again anew and make things better. She loved me. Didn’t I love her?

I lied to my best friend.

I told them I had to go home and take care of our cats.

I looked them in the eyes and I smiled and then I lied to their face about where
I was going, because I was ashamed and afraid and desperate. Because when you’re
in a situation like this, that’s what you do. You lie to yourself and the people
around you and pretend it’s better than it is, that you’re better than you are,
that your partner is better than they are. You tell yourself it’s a phase; you
tell others that it’s nothing; you tell your partner that you’re okay and this
isn’t a problem because maybe if you say this enough it’ll be true.

It won’t. I wish I had known that at any point last year.

I wish Katrina hadn’t damaged not only my own concept of identity but my family,
my friends, and my standing with them. This had ripples upon ripples of far
ranging effects that I either didn’t notice, or did and simply didn’t care. I
wish I hadn’t hurt my friends. I wish she hadn’t hurt them through me.

If you’re reading this, I’m sorry this is how I confessed to you.

I’m not very good at this.

I’m sorry. I hope we’re still okay. Even if I only saw you for a day, it still
made a world of difference to me and helped me more than I can say. You reminded
me what it was to be with someone who sincerely cared about my well-being and
was good for me. I barely managed with you; I wouldn’t have without. I hope you
can understand and forgive me.

I drove back to Katrina’s and stayed there for a few days. We made up. We didn’t
fight. She cried a lot. I sat quietly and told her that I was sorry and that I
didn’t know what I should have done and that I had panicked.

I told her I had to go home. She said she understood and that our mutual friend
from college was coming up to spend the weekend with her, and that she hoped I’d
come back.

----

Katrina called me from the hospital. She’d hurt herself on a trampoline and our
friend had to go back to Indiana for work and wouldn’t I come take her home?

Mom told me not to go. I said I knew I shouldn’t but I was the closest point of
contact and I felt obligated to help her. Mom said that’s what she had parents
for.

Mom was right. She usually is.

I went anyway. I stayed at Katrina’s bed and we talked and the nurse mentioned
that by the by Katrina wasn’t pregnant, among the other things not wrong with
her.

<aside markdown="block">
I still marvel at the fact that she tried to use the possibility of that as a
lever on me despite the very firm impossiblity that this situation could exist
by this time.

We had been on the decline for a while.
</aside>

I took her home and I told her I had to go to a family reunion for Labor Day and
that I’d be back afterwards. I kissed her goodbye and told her I loved her and
she did too.

I haven’t seen her since.

# Did I Learn Anything?

That’s a good question. I honestly don’t know. I hope so?

It took us a month after that to stop talking completely.

If I see a picture of her I know I’m still infatuated. I don’t want to say “in
love” now that it’s over because I hope to God that what I experienced with her
isn’t what that phrase means. I thought it was at the time. I’d like to say I
can’t go through that again, and I probably cannot and remain at all healthy,
but that doesn’t mean I know better than to avoid such a situation in the
future.

I know I absolutely should not see her or talk to her again. She terrifies me
and delights me and I have no confidence in my willpower.

I dream about her sometimes. I dream about her hitting me. Sometimes I dream
that I hit back, that I was the rage-filled monster I was so utterly terrified
of being that I couldn’t raise my voice, let alone my hands. Sometimes I dream
that we’re together and this is all a distant memory, the growing pains of our
relationship, that we’re happy. She’s my whole world in these dreams … because
the rest of mine burned away when I made that choice. I’m with her and I haven’t
spoken to my friends or family in years and I likely never will again.

And it **scares the shit out of me.**

I know, in the abstract, that I don’t want that. That it is a horrible choice
and I must never take it. I know I have to move on and forward and get past her
and this.

And deep down, I fear that I haven’t. That I won’t. That, God forbid, our paths
will cross and she’ll ask me to come home and I’ll step right back into that
even though I know it’s a trap, even though I know I’m consigning myself to more
of the same. I don’t believe even a little bit that I could resist.

# Where Am I Now?

I got *incredibly* lucky. I went home to parents who still loved me and helped
me get back on my feet. I got a job offer by a wild fluke of networking and then
I got that job and I moved to Utah and I’m so *stupendously* happy with what I
do and where I live. I honestly love it here. I have a great job and a great
Scout troop and I still talk to my friends in the Midwest. I wouldn’t have had
any of this had I stayed with Katrina.

It’s been a little over a year since that day in August that I can barely
remember. I remember even as it happened that I was essentially a zombie. I
panicked and I went numb and then I watched my body pack my car and drive away.

I miss her. Not every day, not even all that often. It’ll come out of the blue.
The color will fade out of the world and the sounds will fade into the tone of
my tinnitus and I won’t imagine her face or her voice or anything in particular
but I’ll know what’s missing and what would bring all that back.

But I keep going, because the same trait that kept me with her keeps me out.

I’m stubborn and stupid and I like where I am and I have no intention to move.

It took me two days to write this. I deleted it and started over a few times.
I’ve also been unable to stop shaking whenever this document was open. Normally
I’m very good at remaining still and motionless thanks to some experiences in
Scouting. I cannot stop shaking my legs. Sometimes more, sometimes my breathing
and pulse get erratic, but I can calm those. I can’t sit still though.

Writing the primary section was very difficult. If you’re familiar with my
writing style, you’ll notice that it’s not at all how I usually write. I began
writing and found myself not merely remembering as in recalling facts, but
actively reliving, the events I described and many that I didn’t.

I elided a lot. This isn’t a biography of my friendship and relationship with
Katrina. I wrote this because I wanted to talk about domestic violence. I wanted
to try to explain to you, so that I could maybe explain to myself, that this can
happen to anyone.

I still think of myself as the bad guy in this story. In part because of
everything Katrina told me I had been doing wrong, and how I’d hurt her. In part
because I felt guilty about not knowing how to more gracefully manage myself
around her. In part because I’m a man and doesn’t that mean I’m stronger and
more prone to anger and violence and that I must be restrained at all times
while she’s weaker than me and it’s okay if she lashes out and yells at me or
throws things at me or hits me? Don’t I deserve it, because I’m the aggressor
even though I’m being quiet and still?

I don’t have a solution. I don’t have answers for myself, let alone anyone else.
I have a lot of advantages and things going for me and this happened. I struggle
to acknowledge that I even had it happen to me without trying to explain why she
was right to do it all.

I wish I had a conclusion to this story. I wish I could tell you how to avoid it
in your own life.

I hope that maybe you’ll be able to use it, though. Maybe you’ll understand me
better, or others who are in violent households.

I don’t ask why people with violent partners don’t leave them, anymore. I know
why.

You get betrayed by people you trust. You get abused by people you love. And
when you trust them and love them, you forgive them, and you stay. You know they
have good in them; you know they love you and that this is a fluke and not how
they really are. They love you too, after all. People to whom you don’t matter
don’t get this intensely angry at you. It’s passion, temporarily misapplied.
It feels good to feel that passion, even if it hurts.

You get abused by someone who loves you.

You get abused by someone you love.
