---
title: To All the Posts I’ve Blogged Before
date: 2018-08-26
category: misc
tags:
- writing
summary: >
  A self-involved reflection on why I have this section of my site. Blame
  Manish.
---

I’ve had this blog for, according to git, almost two complete years. The first
commit was October 12<sup>th</sup>, 2016, as was the first post, about a Ruby
tool I wrote.

I don’t write as much as I mean to, and my working folder is littered with
unpublished, half-written drafts of posts I think are good ideas that I lost
momentum midway through writing.

I don’t ever get asked what it’s like to write, because I don’t have much of an
audience aside from a core group of people onto whom I push my work, so I can’t
relate to [Manish’s rationale for writing this genre][manish-post].

I’m writing this because he asked me to review his, and I figured I had time to
kill and might actually make it to the end.

So, here’s my love letter to all the posts I’ve blogged before, all the posts
I totally promise I’m currently blogging, and all the posts I’ll blog to come.
[^1]

# Writing Helps Me Think

It’s “easy” to understand something when it’s only in your head – or, at least,
it’s easy to *think* that you understand something when you don’t have to
explain it to anyone else and only vaguely have to explain it to yourself. But
the act of writing something down, even if it’s in a <del>love letter hidden in
your closet</del> <ins>a draft article you never published</ins>, helps order
thoughts and provide structure and clarity and, if need be, closure, in a way
that leaving them unwritten much less unsaid does not.

If you read my [*Type Theory*] trilogy (in the past tense; don’t go do it now if
you haven’t), that’s an excellent example where writing something down that I
was vaguely contemplating gave me a more concrete understanding of the topic
about which I was trying to think, and what I actually wanted. The second two
articles were rewritten in the back half as I reached a point where I realized
what I was actually hoping to accomplish and the concepts about which I was
writing solidified and organized in my head. If I hadn’t written them, I
wouldn’t have gained the clarity in my own thoughts, and I certainly wouldn’t
have been able to adequately communicate my thoughts to others.[^2]

On a personal, wholly non-technical, note, writing the article [*DV*] (note:
absolutely not required reading) was an incredibly difficult experience, that
cost me several days of effort and energy just to publish and had weeks of
aftershocks as people read it and responded.

But writing it out like that, with so much all in one place in ink and pixels,
connected pieces in my head that I hadn’t before, gave me the chance to see the
larger picture both in what I wrote and what I kept to myself in contrast to
having lived it minute-by-minute at ground level, never looking at the summary
from far above. And though it took almost a year after writing it, and some
in-person shocks and reminders, I finally found a sense of closure built on the
foundation of writing it.

# Writing Helps Me Remember

I majored in Computer Engineering in university, which in the American
curriculum means I spent a lot of time learning about the electrical science
underlying modern digital machines. I learned the physics of electronic
components, I learned the base assembly and layout logic of transistor circuits,
and I learned the theories of how to cobble basic self-governing switches into
tiny logic elements and how to build those into memories and manipulators and
how to turn those into processors and peripherals.

And then I got a job that required none of that knowledge, and even though as I
write it has barely been two years since I last studied all that, I can already
feel the knowledge atrophying. I don’t know the exact equations for determining
clock skew or instruction throughput, much less determining the delay window of
combinatorial elements or the parasitic capacitance or phase shifting of signals
in analog circuitry. I’m throwing these terms out there to prove to myself that
I still know what to use as my landmark if I had to go look these things up!

[*How Computers Work*] is, or I guess **was**, my effort at codifying the
information I learned in university that I found fascinating and useful into
something I could use later to remind myself or to teach others, because I knew
my own biological memory was an imperfect vessel and would be leaking it away.
It already is; I remember knowing the things I wrote in that series, but I could
not rewrite them again today. And I didn’t go far enough, and now I don’t know
if I can.[^3]

Write things down that you learn; in school, at work, in life. Keep a journal,
and you won’t need to remember much more than where to look and how to use it.
Our ability to retain knowledge is profoundly amplified by removing it from the
mind, setting it in the written word, and retaining just the key to look it up
and enough general awareness to use it upon rereading.

# Writing Deduplicates Labor

Whenever I find myself having to give the same talk or explanation multiple
times, I swiftly find myself writing it down in *some* form. Often, lately, this
means too-long Twitter threads. But for things about which I feel strongly that
I need to write down in a formal manner, that means blog articles. Then in the
future, I can casually throw the link at someone if they ask something I’ve
already covered, such as “why do you want to mangle type systems” or “what are
your thoughts on safety”. Beyond just “I already did that once, read this”,
though, the articles also provide a foundation and springboard for further
discussion. They’re a nicely packaged piece of information that anyone can read
without requiring that I recreate it each time, and so everybody who reads it
gets things from me for free, from my perspective, and that’s good! It means my
effort can be spent elaborating or doing other things, rather than rehashing
things I’ve already done and don’t need to manually repeat.

My field in particular is *all about* deduplicating labor. Blog articles are a
phenomenal way to accomplish that for information sharing.

On that note…

## Blogs Don’t Need to Be Unique

It’s not at all a requirement that you write about something about which nobody
else has. If you can find such a topic, and you’re not publishing your personal
diary, congratulations! That’s uncommon.

Blogs aren’t about the topic. They’re about *your understanding* of the topic.
They’re about how you, the author, think about things and what you know and all
the various facets of your personal existence and prior understandings and
knowledge play into that.

Look at [*On Safety*]. The technical information, about lifeguarding or
programming, is nothing new, or even comprehensive. The point of that article is
how safety culture has impacted the way I think and work, and that kind of
writing – an exploration into the individual workings of your mind and how that
shapes your worldview and work – is *always* useful and worth writing down. At
the minimum, readers will be able to better understand you; ideally, they will
be able to learn from you.

## Blogs Don’t Need to Be Theses

This is a trap into which I often fall, but: your blog posts absolutely don’t
need to be ground-breaking, edge-pushing, boundary-shattering explorations of
advanced or novel technical merit. I write about weird, fringe things I want out
of programming, as a means of expressing vague thoughts I have that I don’t know
how to communicate otherwise and aren’t well served by what I already know, but
that’s just a quirk of mine and one on which I need to work.

A record of things you do that you had fun doing or found interesting or just
publishing your lab notes is still a valuable and worthwhile thing to do. I plan
on doing more of that, as much as I can, and my [`bitvec`] and [`cosmonaut`]
pages are attempts at describing some of my work in ordinary and mundane detail.

# Conclusion

When I first started this blog, it was pretty much just for myself. Then I wrote
down some things I wanted to be able to use in larger discussions, and now it
hosts a combination of my personal diary and my technical journal. Both aspects
have proven useful to me alone, and to an audience.

It doesn’t have to be anything fancy, but if you’re reading this and you don’t
have a blog, I highly encourage you to give one a shot. Since my work doesn’t go
viral, I am highly certain that if you’re reading this, you’re someone close
enough to me that my offer of review and help if you want it is one that will be
okay with both of us.

Write your stuff down. Share it. I can’t promise anyone else’s attention but I,
for one, cannot wait to read it. And I hope that you’ll find mine worthwhile,
whenever I manage to actually publish them.

----

Credit to [Manish] for asking me to review *his* article on this topic and
motivating me to write this companion piece, and to [Arshia] for telling me what
a good choice I made in my title.

[*DV*]: /blog/misc/dv
[*How Computers Work*]: /blog/category/how-computers-work
[*On Safety*]: /blog/misc/rust-2018
[*Type Theory*]: /blog/category/type-theory
[`bitvec`]: /bitvec
[`cosmonaut`]: /cosmonaut
[Arshia]: //twitter.com/arshia__
[Manish]: //twitter.com/ManishEarth
[manish-post]: //manishearth.github.io/2018/08/26/blogging.html

[^1]: Title reference is the book and movie “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before”

[^2]: Granted, said communication has largely resulted in the reader screaming
    in terror, but to be fair that is the correct response and indicates
    successful communication.

[^3]: The draft of the next part is about booting a microcontroller and running
    programs on it. I can *probably* write it, but honestly, I’m no longer
    certain of what I know.
